The light-at-night theory of breast cancer causation states that a portion of the high breast cancer risk in the industrialized world, and of the rising risk in the developing word, is due to the introduction and increasing use of electricity to light the night. It is difficult to test this idea in human populations, partly because almost everyone in the modern world uses electric lighting after the sun sets. Specific hypotheses that have been tested include the notions that shift workers should be at higher risk, blind women should be at lower risk, and reported sleep duration should be inversely associated with risk. Girschik et al. (Am J Epidemiol. 2013;177(4):316–327) have tested the latter in a case-control study. Although the case-control design is useful for many questions, it is probably not useful for studies of sleep duration and health.
Expression of the Notch ligand Jagged 1 (JAG1) and Notch activation promote poor-prognosis in breast cancer. We used high throughput screens to identify elements responsible for Notch activation in this context. Chemical kinase inhibitor and kinase-specific small interfering RNA libraries were screened in a breast cancer cell line engineered to report Notch. Pathway analyses revealed MAPK-ERK signaling to be the predominant JAG1/Notch regulator and this was supported by gene set enrichment analyses in 51 breast cancer cell lines. In accordance with the chemical screen, kinome small interfering RNA high throughput screens identified Tribbles homolog 3 (TRB3), a known regulator of MAPK-ERK, among the most significant hits. We demonstrate that TRB3 is a master regulator of Notch through the MAPK-ERK and TGFβ pathways. Complementary in vitro and in vivo studies underscore the importance of TRB3 for tumor growth. These data demonstrate a dominant role for TRB3 and MAPK-ERK/TGFβ pathways as Notch regulators in breast cancer, establishing TRB3 as a potential therapeutic target.
We evaluated the impact of staging procedures to detect asymptomatic distant metastases (DM) in the management of women with operable invasive breast cancer (BC, entire cohort: n = 866). Out of 472 patients with lymph node (LN)-negative disease (pN0), DM were found in four cases (detection rate: 0.8%). All four patients presented with established risk factors: hormone receptor (HR)-negative status, HER2-positive status, n = 3; ‘triple-negative’ disease, n = 1. Considering the subgroup of LN-negative patients whose tumors showed the risk factor ‘negative HR status’ (n = 66), the detection rate of DM was 6%. The detection rates of DM in higher pN categories were as follows: pN1:1.7%; pN2:9.5%; pN3:13.5%. We generally support the international guidelines, including those published by the European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) which emphasize that patients with early-stage BC do not profit from radiological staging for the detection of DM and recommend refraining from this. However, we would expand these guidelines and propose that screening should be carried out in node-negative patients whose tumors show established tumor-related risk factors (e.g. HR-negative and HER2-positive status), since in this particular subcohort, the detection rate of DM is with 6% similarly high as that of patients with four to nine positive LNs.
Recent findings: The prognostic value of pathological complete response (pCR) is different in various breast cancer subtypes. pCR rate after neoadjuvant chemotherapy is associated with better outcome only for patients with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive/hormone receptor negative or HER2-negative/hormone receptor negative (triple-negative) and some more aggressive HER2-negative/hormone receptor positive tumours. Knowledge on pCR in these subtypes can relieve patients from an initially unfavourable prognosis. For patients without a pCR, especially if a high proliferation can be detected in the residual tumour after neoadjuvant treatment, prognosis is still unfavourable and clinical trials exploring new targeted agents in this postneoadjuvant indication are currently under development. Neoadjuvant treatment allows treatment to be guided by monitoring response. Changing the regimen in case of no early response or intensification in case of early response has shown significant survival advantages especially in patients with hormone receptor positive tumours.
Breast cancer affects over 200,000 women each year; however, with earlier diagnosis and more effective treatment, patients are living longer, even in the presence of metastatic disease. Current estimates place patients with breast cancer as the largest population of cancer survivors in the United States. Given the successes in treatment, quality of life (QOL) of breast cancer survivors has become a more important consideration.
Breast cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed invasive cancers. Established risk factors account for only a small proportion of cases. Previous studies have found reductions in sleep duration and quality in the general population over time. There is evidence to suggest a link between poor sleep and an increased risk of breast cancer. In this study, we investigated the relationship between breast cancer and sleep duration and quality in Western Australian women. Data were obtained from a population-based case-control study conducted from 2009 to 2011. Participants completed a self-administered questionnaire that included questions on sleep. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated using unconditional logistic regression. Sensitivity analysis for potential selection and misclassification bias was also conducted. We found no association between self-reported sleep duration on workdays and risk of breast cancer (for <6 hours, odds ratio (OR) = 1.05 (95% CI: 0.82, 1.33); for 6–7 hours, OR = 0.96 (95% CI: 0.80, 1.16); and for >8 hours, OR = 1.10 (95% CI: 0.87, 1.39), compared with the reference category of 7–8 hours’ sleep). In addition, we found no association between sleep duration on nonworkdays, subjective sleep quality, or combined duration and quality and risk of breast cancer. This study does not provide evidence to support an association between self-reported sleep duration or quality and the risk of breast cancer.
The intermediate and advanced stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are frequently associated with weight loss (WL), but WL may even precede the onset of cognitive symptoms. This review focuses on the possible aetiologic and temporal relationships between AD and WL. When WL occurs some years before any signs of cognitive impairment, it may be a risk factor for dementia due to deficiency of several micronutrients, such as vitamins and essential fatty acids, and consequent oxidative tissue damage. The leptin reduction associated with WL may also facilitate cognitive decline. The mechanisms potentially inducing WL in AD include lower energy intake, higher resting energy expenditure, exaggerated physical activity, or combinations of these factors. A hypermetabolic state has been observed in animals with AD, but has not been confirmed in human subjects. This latter mechanism could involve amyloid assemblies that apparently increase the circulating cytokine levels and proton leakage in mitochondria. WL may be caused by patients’ increased physical activity as they develop abnormal motor behaviour (restlessness and agitation) and waste energy while trying to perform daily activities. During the course of AD, patients usually find it increasingly difficult to eat, so they ingest less food. AD-related neurodegeneration also affects brain regions involved in regulating appetite. The caregiver has an important role in ensuring an adequate food intake and controlling behavioural disturbances. In conclusion, WL is closely linked to AD, making periodic nutritional assessments and appropriate dietary measures important aspects of an AD patient's treatment.
Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) frequently arise in people with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other dementias. They cause significant distress and confer risk to the person and others, in addition to presenting a complex clinical challenge for treatment (Ballard et al., 2009b). There is good evidence for the value of first-line management strategies such as psychological interventions and treatment of concurrent medical conditions, particularly pain, which are known to be effective (Ballard et al., 2009b). However, there are limited pharmacological treatment options for severe aggression, which causes significant risk, and for other severe BPSD which do not respond to first-line approaches. The only pharmacological intervention with an adequate evidence base is the prescription of atypical antipsychotics, where 18 placebo-controlled trials have evaluated the effect of treatment over 6–12 weeks. The literature indicates modest but significant benefits in the treatment of aggression and psychosis with risperidone and aripiprazole (Cohen's d standardized effect size of 0.2), uncertain benefits with olanzapine, and no benefits with quetiapine (Ballard and Howard, 2006; Schneider et al., 2006a; Ballard et al., 2009b; Corbett et al., 2012). Unfortunately, the benefits of longer term prescribing are more limited (Schneider et al., 2006b; Ballard et al., 2008) and there have been increasing concerns regarding the potential for serious adverse outcomes, including accelerated cognitive decline, stroke, and death (Schneider et al., 2006b; Ballard et al., 2009a). There is therefore an urgent imperative to identify more effective pharmacological treatments for severe BPSD which have a better safety profile, particularly for long-term treatment and prophylaxis. Despite this urgency, there has been very little effort toward developing or evaluating potential novel therapies for the treatment of key symptoms such as aggression, psychosis, restlessness, and apathy.
The core biomarker pattern is in line with the current pathophysiologic model of AD. Fully normal and fully abnormal pattern is associated with exceptional and universal development of dementia. Cases not in line might be due to atypical neurobiology or inaccurate thresholds for biomarker (ab)normality.
The human landing catch (HLC) has long been the gold standard for estimating malaria transmission by mosquitoes, but has come under scrutiny because of ethical concerns of exposing collectors to infectious bites. We estimated the incidence of Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection in a cohort of 152 persons conducting HLCs and compared it with that of 147 non-collectors in western Kenya. Participants were presumptively cleared of malaria with Coartem™ (artemether-lumefantrine) and tested for malaria every 2 weeks for 12 weeks. The HLC collections were conducted four nights per week for six weeks. Collectors were provided chemoprophylaxis with Malarone™ (atovaquone-proguanil) during the six weeks of HLC activities and one week after HLC activities were completed. The incidence of malaria was 96.6% lower in collectors than in non-collectors (hazard ratio = 0.034, P < 0.0001). Therefore, with proper prophylaxis, concern about increased risk of malaria among collectors should not be an impediment to conducting HLC studies.
A cross-sectional study of Blastocystis infection was conducted to evaluate the prevalence, risk factors, and subtypes of Blastocystis at the Home for Girls, Bangkok, Thailand in November 2008. Of 370 stool samples, 118 (31.9%) were infected with Blastocystis. Genotypic characterization of Blastocystis was performed by polymerase chain reaction and sequence analysis of the partial small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) gene. Subtype 1 was the most predominant (94.8%), followed by subtype 6 (3.5%) and subtype 2 (1.7%). Sequence analyses revealed nucleotide polymorphisms for Blastocystis subtype 1, which were described as subtype 1/variant 1, subtype 1/variant 2. Blastocystis subtype 1/variant 1 was the most predominant infection occurring in almost every house. The results showed that subtype analysis of Blastocystis was useful for molecular epidemiological study.
Exclusion of malaria traditionally requires three negative serial thick and thin blood films. However, many clinical laboratories now routinely perform rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) in addition to blood films when malaria is suspected. We sought to determine whether serial testing is necessary in this setting. We examined 388 cases of malaria diagnosed during 1999–2010 at three laboratories in Melbourne, Australia. For each case, we ascertained whether the diagnosis was made on initial or follow-up testing. Nine cases (3.5%) were diagnosed after a negative initial blood film and RDT: 7 Plasmodium vivax, 1 P. ovale, and 1 P. falciparum. Of four case-patients with P. vivax in which clinical data were available, all had recent exposure to antimalarial medication. Our data suggest that among patients who have not received recent anti-malarial therapy, and when RDTs are performed and blood films are prepared, most malaria diagnoses are made by using the first set of tests.
Background: Ageing is a universal phenomenon for all the living subjects. Various theories exist for the process of ageing, but the highly accepted theory is “Free Radical Theory of Ageing” conceived by Harman. According to this theory there is some imbalance between production and scavenging mechanisms of free radicals. The free radicals produce damage over the lifetime which is critical in determining the life span of individual. In context of this theory the present study was conceived. Objective: To investigate the correlation of free radicals and ageing process in human individuals. Materials and Methods: Adult volunteers with the age of 21 to 80 yrs were divided into three groups of 21-40 yrs, 41-60 yrs and 61-80 yrs. In each group there were 30 individuals. The serum levels of Glutathione reductase (GSSG-reductase) and Total antioxidant status (TAS) were measured in all the individuals. The data was subjected to ANOVA. Then student’s unpaired T-test was used for evaluation and the values of P < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. The data was also analyzed for correlation coefficient (r). Results: The levels of GSSG-reductase and TAS were significantly lower in 61-80 yrs age group. There was negative correlation between ageing versus GSSG-reductase as well as TAS. Conclusion: Oxidative stress is generated during various stages of life. The gradual but steady fall of the antioxidant GSSG-reductase and falling level of TAS provide reasonable indication of weakness in antioxidant shield for the individuals. It is concluded that there is correlation between generation of free radicals and ageing process.
The conception of the aging mind that emerged from behavioral and structural imaging studies portrayed the mind as a victim of passive deterioration and decline with age, with a few domains of preserved function. The advent of functional neuroimaging has demonstrated that the aging brain is an adaptive and plastic structure that responds dynamically to cognitive challenge and structural deterioration—thus, fundamentally changing views of cognitive aging. In addition, a neural theory of the aging mind based on behavioral data—the dedifferentiation view of cognitive aging—was largely confirmed when neuroimaging technology became available to test it. We argue that functional neuroimaging has advanced cognitive aging theories by creating a stronger emphasis on compensatory mechanisms related to brain plasticity and potential reorganization as evidenced by the resurgence of interest and research in cognitive training research designed to improve cognition through enhancement of neural structures or reorganization of functional circuitry.
The Trastuzumab for Gastric Cancer (ToGA) study is the first international trial to include Japanese patients with human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2)-positive advanced or recurrent gastric or gastroesophageal junction cancer, which demonstrated that trastuzumab plus chemotherapy improved overall survival in the overall population (hazard ratio 0.74). HER2 testing in gastric cancer differs from testing in breast cancer due to inherent differences in tumor biology; gastric cancer more frequently shows HER2 heterogeneity and incomplete membrane staining. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the frequency of HER2-positive cases by application of the standard criteria in Japanese patients with advanced gastric cancer (AGC) and to investigate the relationships between HER2 expression and therapeutic responses. Methods: A total of 199 tumor samples were assessed for HER2 expression both by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and HER2 amplification by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). HER2-positive status was defined as IHC2+ and FISH-positive or IHC3+. Objective responses were evaluated in the patients with AGC who were treated with chemotherapy plus trastuzumab or chemotherapy alone based on the HER2 expression status. Results: HER2-positive tumors were identified in 12 patients (5.5%), less than 28.1% in the Japanese subgroup analyses of ToGA study. The positive rates varied with histological type; 14%, 5.3% and 0.95% in the well, moderately and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, respectively. Although high concordance between the results of IHC and FISH in all samples was found, IHC2+ samples retested here showed FISH-negative. Of all 10 patients with AGC, 3 patients with HER2-positive tumor were treated with capecitabine/cisplatin plus trastuzumab, and partial response was found in 2 cases; response rates were 67%. Conclusions: Specific consideration and scoring modification are required before embarking on HER2 testing in gastric cancer. Accurate and reliable HER2 testing and scoring will allow appropriate selection of patients eligible for treatment with trastuzumab.
Schizophrenia is widely held to stem from the combined effects of multiple common polymorphisms, each with a small impact on disease risk. We suggest an alternative view: that schizophrenia is highly heterogeneous genetically and that many predisposing mutations are highly penetrant and individually rare, even specific to single cases or families. This `common disease – rare alleles' hypothesis is supported by recent findings in human genomics and by allelic and locus heterogeneity for other complex traits. We review the implications of this model for gene discovery research in schizophrenia.
Recent studies have linked infectious agents to schizophrenia. The largest number of studies has involved the analysis of Toxoplasma gondii; these studies were subjected to a meta-analysis. Published articles and abstracts were identified by searches of MEDLINE, Ovid, and Google Scholar; by a search of Chinese publications; through letters to researchers; and by visiting China. Published and unpublished controlled studies that used serological methods for measuring T. gondii antibodies to assess inpatients and/or outpatients diagnosed with schizophrenia were selected for analysis, and source documents were translated as needed. Forty-two studies carried out in 17 countries over 5 decades were identified; 23 of these (6 unpublished) met selection criteria. The combined odds ratio (OR) was 2.73 (95% confidence interval, 2.10 to 3.60; chi-square with 1 df 263; P < .000001). Seven studies that included only patients with first-episode schizophrenia (OR 2.54) did not differ significantly from 16 studies that included patients in all clinical phases (OR 2.79). The results suggest that individuals with schizophrenia have an increased prevalence of antibodies to T. gondii. This association is consistent with other epidemiological studies as well as with animal studies. Although the OR of 2.73 is modest, it exceeds that for genetic or other environmental factors identified to date and suggests that Toxoplasma is in some way associated with a large number of cases of schizophrenia. If an etiological association can be proven, it would have implications for the design of measures for the prevention and treatment of this disease.
The field of proteomics has made leaps and bounds in the last 10 years particularly in the fields of oncology and cardiovascular medicine. In comparison, neuroproteomics is still playing catch up mainly due to the relative complexity of neurological disorders. Schizophrenia is one such disorder, believed to be the results of multiple factors both genetic and environmental. Affecting over 2 million people in the US alone, it has become a major clinical and public health concern worldwide. This paper gives an update of schizophrenia biomarker research as reviewed by Lakhan in 2006 and gives us a rundown of the progress made during the last two years. Several studies demonstrate the potential of cerebrospinal fluid as a source of neuro-specific biomarkers. Genetic association studies are making headway in identifying candidate genes for schizophrenia. In addition, metabonomics, bioinformatics, and neuroimaging techniques are aiming to complete the picture by filling in knowledge gaps. International cooperation in the form of genomics and protein databases and brain banks is facilitating research efforts. While none of the recent developments described here in qualifies as biomarker discovery, many are likely to be stepping stones towards that goal.
Chronic infection with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major risk factor for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) worldwide. The pathogenesis of HCC in HCV infection has extensively been analysed. Hepatitis C virus-induced chronic inflammation and the effects of cytokines in the development of fibrosis and liver cell proliferation are considered as one of the major pathogenic mechanisms. Increasing experimental evidence suggests that HCV contributes to HCC by directly modulating pathways that promote the malignant transformation of hepatocytes. Hepatitis C virus is an RNA virus that does not integrate into the host genome but HCV proteins interact with many host-cell factors well beyond their roles in the viral life cycle and are involved in a wide range of activities, including cell signaling, transcription, cell proliferation, apoptosis, membrane rearrangements, vesicular trafficking and translational regulation. At least four of the HCV gene products, namely HCV core, NS3, NS4B and NS5A, have been shown to exhibit transformation potential in tissue culture and several potentially oncogenic pathways have been shown to be altered by the expression of HCV proteins. Both HCV core and NS5A induce the accumulation of wild-type -catenin and the Wnt–-catenin pathway emerges as a common target for HCV (and HBV) in human HCCs, also independently from axin/-catenin gene mutations. Induction of both endoplasmic reticulum stress and oxidative stress by HCV proteins might also contribute to HCV transformation. Most of the putative transforming functions of the HCV proteins have been defined in artificial cellular systems, which may not be applicable to HCV infection in vivo, and still need to be established in relevant infection and disease models.
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are known to play an important role in melanoma development and progression. However, the downstream targets of BMPs have not been investigated thus far. Therefore, we treated melanoma cell lines with the Smad-specific BMP inhibitor Dorsomorphin and performed a cDNA microarray. We identified death inducer-obliterator 1 (Dido1) as a BMP-specific Smad-regulated target gene, which was confirmed by qRT–PCR, immunofluorescence staining and electrophoretic mobility shift assay experiments. An analysis of Dido1 expression revealed an upregulation of Dido1 levels in melanoma cell lines and tissues compared with normal melanocytes. Colony-formation assays showed that siDido1-transfected cells formed significantly smaller colonies when grown in soft agar compared with control cells. In addition, fluorescence-activated cell sorting and western blot experiments revealed that transfection of melanoma cells with Dido1 small interfering RNAs led to an upregulation of apoptosis. Furthermore, cell migratory and invasive potentials were strongly reduced in siDido1-transfected cells compared with control cells. Finally, we demonstrated that Dido1 induces the expression of Integrin αV, thereby promoting the attachment, migration, invasion and apoptosis resistance of melanoma cells.